---
title: "Machine learning  assisted prediction of metal-insulator transition in dynamical mean field theory"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
date: 2021-08-03 20:07:00
categories: 
  - Physics
tags: 
  - 2021-spring
  - 2021-summer
use_math: true
published : false
---

This work is a collaborative work, thus my contribution to this research is
- Conducting DMFT-NRG and obtain data from it.
- Train neural network model with DMFT-NRG hybridization function, calculate accuracy
- Transformation of weight matrix to ensure that the input layer receives the Matsubara frequency domain data.
- Test our neural network model with the hybridization function on the Matsubara frequency domain. 
- Analyze the structure of neural network.

This is the remaining research that my contribution is smaller.
- ...and find the quantity $S_2$, which is similar to order parameter.
- Train the linear perceptron model with $S_2$, confirm that it is the order parameter.


## Introduction of DMFT
Dynamic mean-field theory is the method to describe the properties of the strongly correlated materials.
DMFT maps many-body lattice problem into many-body local problem which is the impurity problem.
Using the Anderson impurity model, it is now solvable with the self-consistency equation.
Various solvers are such as NRG(numerical renormalization group), ED(exact diagonalization), or QMC(quantum Monte-Carlo).

Especially, DMFT-NRG is the method that can calculate the exact spectral function on the real frequency. For the Bethe lattice, the spectral function is equivalent to the imaginary part of the hybridization function, and therefore, we will predict the phase transition of the DMFT on the Hubbard model by training a simple neural network model with the hybridization function. Furthermore, we will test this model on the Matsubara frequency.


## Reference
1. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamical_mean-field_theory>
2. R. Bulla, T. A. Costi, D. Vollhardt, <https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.80.395>
